patchRcPath hooks: init and apply to package `root` (#195359)
NixOS/nixpkgs: doc/hooks/patch-activation-hooks.section.md

# `patchActivation` hooks {#sec-patchActivationHooks}

These hooks provide shell-specific utilities (with the same name as the hook) to patch shell scripts meant to be sourced by software users.

> The typical usage is to patch the "activation scripts" inside `$out/bin`;

Reviewer: @ShamrockLee sorry for the long waiting time. I was kind of procrastinating taking another look at the documentation. This PR always produced a weird feeling, because I could get rid of the impression of not fully understanding what the new feature does.

Took a look again today, and now I see the problem: You call these wrappers "activation scripts", and that confused the hell out of me. [`activationScript`](https://nixos.org/manual/nixos/stable/#sec-activation-script) is a completely unrelated concept in NixOS (and in itself misleading, because too low-level for most users to care about).

Since Nixpkgs users with high probability are also NixOS users, I expect the "activation" part of the naming to produce lots of confusion for other readers, too.

Please correct me if I'm wrong here. I understand your patch tools are for wrapper scripts around binaries in packages. They should not be called "activation scripts", for the above reason. If you confirm that understand this correctly, I reluctantly veto this PR until we find a more suitable name. Sorry for the additional work that would entail for you.

Proposal: `patchWrapper` hooks.

Author: Thanks a lot for pointing out the problem! I don't even notice that the naming conflict to that widely-used infrastructure.

The name I originally choose was `patchSourcetimePath` hooks, as they provided a temporary `PATH` prefix to the `source`-able shell script, but later replaced it to make it shorter.

`patchWrapper` sounds good, but I don't expect people to use it on script wrappers generated by `makeWrapper`. How about `patchRcPath`? Those scripts are usually sourced before running the main program.

Reviewer: Agreed that "wrapper" brings in a context that does not apply here.

`patchRcPath` is good, because it's technically correct and concise. It would be really valuable to add a brief note in the manual section (and link to the source) explaining what `rc` means here, otherwise the name will be unhelpful to everyone except the most greybearded Unixoids.

For example: https://kb.iu.edu/d/abnd via https://unix.stackexchange.com/questions/111611/what-does-the-rc-stand-for-in-etc-rc-d

Author: Added.

such scripts, when being sourced, insert the binary location to `PATH` and optionally modify other environment variables.

The compatible shells for each hook are:

 - `patchActivationBash`: [Bash](https://www.gnu.org/software/bash/), [ksh](http://www.kornshell.org/), [zsh](https://www.zsh.org/) and other shells supporting the Bash-like parameter expansions.
 - `patchActivationCsh`: Csh scripts, such as those targeting [tcsh](https://www.tcsh.org/).
 - `patchActivationFish`: [Fish](https://fishshell.com/) scripts.
 - `patchActivationPosix`: POSIX-conformant shells supporting the limited parameter expansions specified by the POSIX standard. Current implementation uses the parameter expansion `${foo-}` only.

For each supported shell, it modifies the script with a `PATH` prefix that is later removed when the script ends.
It allows nested patching, which guarantees that a patched script may source another patched script.

Syntax to apply the utility to a script:

```sh

> patchActivation<Shellname> <file> <PATH-prefix>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
patchActivation<shell> <file> <PATH-prefix>
```

> # `patchActivationBash`, `patchActivationCsh`, `patchActivationFish`, `patchActivationPosix` {#sec-patchActivationHooks}
> 
> These hooks provide utilities to patch
> shell scripts meant to be sourced (e.g. the "activate" scripts).

Reviewer: Sourced where, by whom? I think this needs a more precise description of context. Please check if this is called "activate" scripts everywhere, use the canonical name, and link to the respective section in the docs. Isn't this primarily about build hooks?

```suggestion
# `patchActivation` hooks {#sec-patchActivationHooks}

These hooks provide utilities to patch shell scripts meant to be sourced (e.g. the "activate" scripts):
```

This should be followed by the list of hooks.

Author: The hooks are to patch the scripts meant to be sourced *by the software users*, not the implementation of another setup hook. A setup hook can get all it needs by the `substitutions` attribute and the `@foo@` syntax already, while the target scripts are provided by the upstream and might not be patch-able through string-finding-and-replacing.

> This should be followed by the list of hooks.

There seems to be two places to document the setup hooks inside the Nixpkgs Manual, one is [6.7. Package setup hooks (ssec-setup-hooks)](https://nixos.org/manual/nixpkgs/stable/#ssec-setup-hooks), the other is [Chapter 16. Hooks reference (chap-hooks)](https://nixos.org/manual/nixpkgs/stable/#chap-hooks). Not sure which one to go for.

It inserts two sections of codes into the beginning and the end of the script:
the former inserts a `PATH` prefix, while the latter clears it up.
This way, the original commands will have access to the executables needed,
but how `PATH` variable is changed by the script remains the same after patching.

A stack is used to record the inserted `PATH` prefixes when patched multiple times,

> so that a patched activation script can correctly source another patched script.

Reviewer: Not sure if the implementation detail is all that important, and while I don't oppose including it, I think it can be shorter. Don't have a concrete suggestion though, sorry. Maybe something like "For each supported shell, creates a context with a `PATH` prefix for the given script, which is exited when the script ends, and allows nested contexts" (but this may be thought in a too Pythonic way).

The utilities are called as

```sh
patchActivation<Shellname> <file> <PATH-prefix>
```

Example usage:

```nix
{ lib, stdenv, patchActivationBash}:
stdenv.mkDerivation {

  # ...

  nativeBuildInputs = [
    patchActivationBash
  ];

  postFixup = ''

>     patchActivationBash $out/bin/activate-foo.zsh ${lib.makeBinPath [ coreutils man which ]}

Reviewer: This needs an example of `activate-foo` to make clear why we call it that way. Something like

> Given a build hook `foo` that depends on `sed`, `man` and `which` (it seems we may need a more sensible example), patch the hook to have its dependencies available without interfering with the rest of the `setup` environment.

Author: Thanks a lot for the example context.

The hook is to patch the scripts meant to be sourced by the software users, not the implementation of another setup hook. A setup hook can get all it needs by the `substitutions` attribute and the `@foo@` syntax, while the target scripts are provided by the upstream that might not be easily patched through string-find-and-replacing.

  '';
}
```

## Compatible shell languages {#sec-patchActivationHooks-shells}

As the patch is language-specific, different hooks are plovided for different shells:

 - `patchActivationBash`: Bash, Ksh, Zsh and other shells supporting the Bash-like parameter expansions.
 - `patchActivationCsh`: C Shell (Csh) scripts.
 - `patchActivationFish`: Friendly Interactive Shell (Fish) scripts.

>  - `patchActivationPosix`: POSIX-conformant shells supporting the limited parameter expansions specified by the POSIX standard.

Reviewer: This should move to the top, as in my suggestion.

It's not mandatory, but it would be worthwhile to link to the manuals or front pages of each specific shell.

Author: > This should move to the top, as in the other comment.

Addressed.

> It's not mandatory, but it would be worthwhile to link to the manuals or front pages of each specific shell.

Sounds great! There's currently no section for shell scripts. Should we create one?

Reviewer: > Should we create one?

Of course, feel free to open a PR.
